Titel:

Sentimentanalyse deutschen Twitters


Zusammenfassung:

Die enorme Popularität von Online-Kommunikationsdiensten in den
letzten Jahrzehnten hat nicht unser Leben massiv geändert (wo
Nachrichten sich wie Fegefeuer übers Internet ausbreiten, Präsidenten
ihre Entscheidungen auf Twitter ankündigen, und Ergebnisse politischer
Wahlen in Facebook entschieden werden) sondern auch zu einem
dramatischen Anstieg der Datenmenge geführt, die über solche
Plattformen ausgetauscht werden.  Deswegen braucht man heutzutage
dringend neue, zuverlässige, qualitätvolle NLP-Programme, um
gesselschaftliche Bedürfnisse und Risiken automatisch aus unzensierten
Nutzernachrichten erkennen und abschätzen zu können.  Leider wurden
die meisten modernen NLP-Anwendungen entweder für standardsprachliche
Texte kreiert (wie wir sie aus Zeitungstexten kennen) oder im besten
Fall an die Spezifika englischer Social Media angepasst.

Diese Dissertation reduziert den bestehenden Rückstand auf diesem
Gebiet, indem sie das ``Neuland'' der deutschen Online-Kommunikation
betritt und sich einer seiner am meist verbreitesten Form
zuwendet---Nutzerdiskussionen auf Twitter.  Genauer gesagt, diese
Arbeit erforscht die Art und Weise, wie Leute ihre Meinungen auf
diesem Online-Service äußern, analysiert existierende Verfahren zur
automatischen Erkennung solcher Gefühle und schlägt neue Methoden vor,
die

Zu diesem Zweck stelle ich ein neues Korpus deutscher Tweets vor, die
manuell mit Sentimenten (polaren Meinungen), ihren Quellen (sources)
und Zielen (targets) sowie lexikalischen polaren Elementen und deren
kontextuellen Modifizierern annotiert wurden.  Mit Hilfe dieser Daten

------------------------------------------------------------------

\noindent This thesis reduces the existing deficit by entering the new
frontier of German online communication and addressing one of its most
prolific forms---users' conversations on Twitter.  In particular, it
explores the ways and means by how people express their opinions on
this service, examines current approaches to automatic mining of these
feelings, and proposes novel methods that outperform state-of-the-art
techniques.  For this purpose, I introduce a new corpus of German
tweets that have been manually annotated with sentiments, their
targets and holders, as well as lexical polarity items and their
contextual modifiers.
%% A detailed inter-annotator agreement study of our dataset shows that
%% not only are sentiments difficult to analyze for people, but this task
%% becomes even more challenging in the presence of emoticons or when
%% dealing with political topics.
Using these data, I explore four major areas of sentiment research:
\begin{inparaenum}[(i)]
\item generation of sentiment lexicons,
\item aspect-based opinion mining,
\item message-level polarity classification, and
\item discourse-aware sentiment analysis.
\end{inparaenum}
In the first task, I compare three popular groups of lexicon
generation methods: dictionary-, corpus-, and word-embedding--based
ones, finding that dictionary-based systems generally yield better
polarity lists than the last two groups.  Apart from this, I propose a
linear projection algorithm, whose results surpass many existing
automatically-generated lexicons.  Afterwords, in the second task, I
examine two common approaches to automatic prediction of sentiment
spans, their sources, and targets: conditional random fields (CRFs)
and recurrent neural networks, obtaining higher scores with the former
model and improving these results even further by redefining the
structure of CRF graphs.  When dealing with message-level polarity
classification, I juxtapose three major sentiment paradigms: lexicon-,
machine-learning--, and deep-learning--based systems, and try to unite
the first and last of these method groups by introducing a
bidirectional neural network with lexicon-based attention. Finally, in
order to make the new classifier aware of microblogs' discourse
structure, I let it separately analyze the elementary discourse units
of each tweet and infer the overall polarity of a message from the
scores of its EDUs with the help of two new approaches:
latent-marginalized CRFs and Recursive Dirichlet Process.
